DOCSP-45367 Associations pt. 1 (#79)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/data-modeling/associations.txt

.. _mongoid-associations:

============
Associations
============

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: ruby framework, odm, code example

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

Associations in {+odm+} allow you to create relationships between models. In
this guide, you can learn about the different types of associations that
{+odm+} supports and how to use them in your application.

Referenced Associations
------------------------

Referenced associations allow you to create a relationship between two models
where one model references the other. {+odm+} supports the following referenced
association types:

- ``has_one``
- ``has_many``
- ``belongs_to``
- ``has_and_belongs_to_many``

The following sections describe how to use each of these association types.

Has One
~~~~~~~

You can use the ``has_one`` macro to declare that a class model contains a child document

> that is stored in a separate collection. The following example creates a

Author: Agreed that was confusing. I reworded this a bit to hopefully make more sense

> that is stored in a separate collection. The following example creates a

Reviewer: yes I think that works!

You can use the ``has_many`` macro to declare that a class model contains
multiple child documents that are stored in a separate collection. The following
example creates a ``Band`` class with a ``has_many`` relationship to a
``Members`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-many
   :end-before: # end-has-many

When you declare a ``has_many`` association, the child class must also use the
``belongs_to`` association that references the parent class. The following
example shows the ``Member`` class referenced in the preceding ``Band`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-many-child
   :end-before: # end-has-many-child

To learn more about the ``belongs_to`` macro, see the :ref:`Belongs To
<mongoid-belongs-to>` section.

You can use :ref:`validations <mongoid-validation>` to ensure that the child
class is present in your parent class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-many-validation
   :end-before: # end-has-many-validation
   :emphasize-lines: 6

> 

Reviewer: S: since there's a lot of info below about any? and exists?, you could make a subsection here titled something like "Association methods" or "Retrieve association information"

``Band`` class contain any ``Members`` documents:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-many-any
   :end-before: # end-has-many-any

You can also use the ``any?`` method with a filter to find documents that match
a specified criteria, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-many-any-filter
   :end-before: # end-has-many-any-filter

You can supply a class name to the ``any?`` method to filter the results by the
name of the class. This is useful for polymorphic associations:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-many-any-class
   :end-before: # end-has-many-any-class

.. note::

   After the data of the associated class is loaded to {+odm+}, subsequent calls
   to the ``any?`` method do not query the database. Instead, {+odm+} uses the
   data that is already loaded in memory.

You can also call the ``exists?`` method to determine if there are any persisted
documents in the association. The ``exists?`` method always queries the

> database, and checks only for documents that have been saved to the database.

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
database and checks only for documents that have been saved to the database.
```

   :start-after: # start-has-many-exists
   :end-before: # end-has-many-exists

.. _mongoid-belongs-to:

Belongs To
~~~~~~~~~~

Use the ``belongs_to`` macro to declare that a class model is a child of another
class. By default, the ``_id`` field of the parent class is stored in the child
class. The following example creates a ``Members`` class with a ``belongs_to``
association to a ``Band`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-belongs-to
   :end-before: # end-belongs-to

You can allow {+odm+} to persist documents to the database without storing the
``_id`` of the associated parent class by setting the ``optional`` option to
``true``, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-belongs-to-optional
   :end-before: # end-belongs-to-optional

.. tip::

   You can globally change the default behavior of the ``belongs_to``
   association to not require their parent class by setting the
   ``belongs_to_required_by_default`` configuration option to ``false`` in your
   application's configuration settings.

> You can specify a ``belongs_to`` in a child class without specifying a matching

Reviewer: S: just for clarity
```suggestion
You can specify a ``belongs_to`` association in a child class without specifying a matching
```

``has_one`` or ``has_many`` association in the parent class. When doing so, the

> documents of the parent class are accessible from the child class, but the child

Reviewer: Q: what does it mean for the parent models to be accessible from the child? A document in Members has a field whose value is a document in the Band class?

Author: Reworded this. The child class automatically stores the _id field of the parent, so that is accessible in this case.

class cannot access the ``Members`` class, but the ``Members`` class can access the
``Band`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-belongs-to-one-way
   :end-before: # end-belongs-to-one-way

For clarity, you can optionally set the ``inverse_of`` option to ``nil`` to
indicate that the parent class does not contain a ``has_one`` or ``has_many``
association to the child class, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-belongs-to-inverse
   :end-before: # end-belongs-to-inverse

Has and Belongs To Many
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use the ``has_and_belongs_to_many`` macro to declare that a class model contains
a many-to-many relationship with another class. In a many-to-many relationship,
each document in one class can be associated with multiple documents in another
class. The following example creates a ``Band`` class with a
``has_and_belongs_to_many`` relationship to a ``Members`` class. A ``Band`` document can
reference multiple ``Members`` documents, and a ``Members`` document can

> reference multipls ``Band`` documents.

Reviewer: I: typo fix
```suggestion
reference multiple ``Band`` documents.
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-and-belongs-to-many
   :end-before: # end-has-and-belongs-to-many

When you declare a ``has_and_belongs_to_many`` association, both model instances
store a list of the associated document's ID values. You can set the
``inverse_of`` option to ``nil`` to store the associated document's ID values in
only one of the model instances. The following example prompts {+odm+} to store
the associated document's ID values in only the ``Band`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-and-belongs-to-many-inverse
   :end-before: # end-has-and-belongs-to-many-inverse

.. tip::

   When you update a document that has a ``has_and_belongs_to_many`` association,

>    {+odm+} sets the ``updated_at`` field of updated document, but does not set the

Reviewer: S: remove comma before the incomplete sentence
```suggestion
   {+odm+} sets the ``updated_at`` field of updated document but does not set the
```

``band_id`` values.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-association-query
   :end-before: # end-association-query

Embedded Associations
---------------------

You can use embedded associations to store different types of documents in the
same collection. {+odm+} supports embedded associations with the following 
macros:

- ``embeds_one``
- ``embeds_many``
- ``embedded_in``
- ``recursively_embeds_one``
- ``recursively_embeds_many``

The following sections describe how to use these association types.

Embeds One
~~~~~~~~~~

To specify that a class model contains an embedded document of a different
class type, use the ``embeds_one`` macro in the parent class and the ``embedded_in``
macro in the embedded class. The following example creates a ``Band`` class with
an embedded ``Label`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embed-one
   :end-before: # end-embed-one

{+odm+} stores documents embedded with the ``embeds_one`` macro in the
parent document as a field with the same name as the embedded class. The

> preceding ``Label`` documents are stored in the ``Band`` document as shown in

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
preceding ``Label`` documents are stored in the ``Band`` document, as shown in
```

the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embed-one-stored
   :end-before: # end-embed-one-stored

You can store the embedded document with a different name by using the
``store_as`` option, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embed-store-as
   :end-before: # end-embed-store-as

Embeds Many
~~~~~~~~~~~

To specify that a class model contains multiple embedded documents of a
different class type, use the ``embeds_many`` macro in the parent class and the
``embedded_in`` macro in the embedded class. The following example creates a
``Band`` class with multiple embedded ``Album`` type documents:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embed-many
   :end-before: # end-embed-many

{+odm+} stores documents embedded with the ``embeds_many`` macro in the
parent document as an array field with the same name as the embedded class. The

> preceding ``Album`` documents are stored in the ``Band`` document as shown in

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
preceding ``Album`` documents are stored in the ``Band`` document, as shown in
```

the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embed-many-stored
   :end-before: # end-embed-many-stored

You can store the embedded document with a different name by using the
``store_as`` option, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embed-many-store-as
   :end-before: # end-embed-many-store-as

Recursive Embedding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can recursively embed one or more documents of the same type into a parent

Reviewer: S: can you briefly describe what it means to recursively embed a document? Unless you're assuming the reader is familiar with the concept

Author: I think this whole section is essentially an explanation of what "recursive embedding" is, so I removed "recursively embed" from the first sentence to make it seem less like we're introducing a new term here.

You can access the parent and child documents through the ``parent_band`` and
``child_band`` methods, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-recursive-embed-access
   :end-before: # end-recursive-embed-access

Query Embedded Associations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can access embedded documents when querying the collection of the parent
class by using dot notation.

The following example uses dot notation to query ``Tour`` type documents that
are embedded in a ``Band`` class. The query returns documents that have a
``tours.year`` value of ``2000`` or greater:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embedded-query
   :end-before: # end-embedded-query

You can use the ``pluck()`` projection method to retrieve embedded documents
without retrieving their associated parent documents, as shown in the following
example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embedded-query-pluck
   :end-before: # end-embedded-query-pluck

> You can use {+odm+} query methods to query on embedded associations of documents
> that are already loaded in the application. This is called "embedded matching"
> and is implemented by {+odm+} without sending queries to the server.

Reviewer: S: not sure if you need the quotes around embedded matching, maybe you could reword to:
```suggestion
You can use {+odm+} query methods to perform embedded matching, or to query on embedded associations of documents
that are already loaded in the application. {+odm+} implements embedded matching without sending queries to the server.
```

The following query operators are supported with embedded matching:

- :manual:`Comparison operators </reference/operator/query-comparison/>`
- :manual:`Logical operators </reference/operator/query-logical/>`
- :manual:`Array query operators </reference/operator/query-array/>`
- :manual:`$exists </reference/operator/query/exists/>`
- :manual:`$mod </reference/operator/query/mod/>`
- :manual:`$type </reference/operator/query/type/>`
- :manual:`$regex </reference/operator/query/regex/>`
- :manual:`Bitwise operators </reference/operator/query-bitwise/>`
- :manual:`$comment </reference/operator/query/comment/>`

The following example queries the embedded ``tours`` field of a loaded ``Band``
document by using the ``$gte`` comparison operator:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embedded-matching
   :end-before: # end-embedded-matching

Embedded matching on loaded documents has the following known limitations:

> - Embedded matching is not implemented for the following:

Reviewer: S: add a word to complete the sentence; "features" or "contexts" seem right
```suggestion
- Embedded matching is not implemented for the following features:
```

  
  - :ref:`Text search <mongoid-text-search>`
  - :manual:`Geospatial query operators </reference/operator/query-geospatial/>`
  - Operators that execute JavaScript code, such as :manual:`$where </reference/operator/query/where/>`

>   - operators that are implemented through other server functionality, such as

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
  - Operators that are implemented through other server functionality, such as
```

- {+odm+} expands ``Range`` arguments to hashes with ``$gte`` and ``$lte``
  conditions. This can lead to invalid queries in some cases and raises a an
  ``InvalidQuery`` exception.

- With the ``$regex`` operator, you cannot specify a regular expression object
  as a pattern while also providing options to the ``$options`` field. You can
  only provide options if the regular expression pattern is a string.

- MongoDB Server versions 4.0 and earlier do not strictly validate ``$type``
  arguments.

Omit _id Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, {+odm+} adds an ``_id`` field to embedded documents. You can omit
this field from embedded documents by explicitly specifying the ``_id`` field in
your model and omitting the default value. The following example instructs {+odm+}
not to add an ``_id`` field to the ``Albums`` class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embedded-omit-id
   :end-before: # end-embedded-omit-id
   :emphasize-lines: 4

In the preceding ``Albums`` class, the ``_id`` field is not automatically added.
Without a default value, {+odm+} does not store the value in the database

> unless it is provided.

Reviewer: S: to avoid passive voice / clarify who's providing
```suggestion
unless you provide one in your model.
```

Delete Embedded Associations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can delete child documents from ``embeds_many`` associations by using one of
the following methods:

- ``clear()``
- ``delete_all()``
- ``destroy_all()``

The ``clear()`` method uses the :manual:`$unset operator
</reference/operator/update/unset>` operator to remove an entire embedded
association from the parent document. The ``clear()`` method does not run any
``destroy`` callbacks. The following example uses the ``clear()``

> method to remove all embedded associations from the ``Band`` class.

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
method to remove all embedded associations from the ``Band`` class:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-embedded-clear
   :end-before: # end-embedded-clear

The ``delete_all()`` method uses the :manual:`$pullAll operator
</reference/operator/update/pullAll>` operator to remove documents in an
embedded association. ``delete_all()`` loads the association if it has not
yet been loaded, then only removes the documents that exist in the application.

> The ``delete_all()`` method does not run any ``destroy`` callbacks. 

Reviewer: Q: would the reader most likely know what "destroy callbacks" are?

Author: I wondered that as well and looked into it, it seems like the destroy callbacks are things the user would define themselves on a model if they wanted them, so I think it's a Ruby practice that the user should know about.

For clarity, you can optionally set the ``inverse_of`` option to ``nil`` to
indicate that the parent class does not contain a ``has_one`` or ``has_many``
association to the child class, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-belongs-to-inverse
   :end-before: # end-belongs-to-inverse

Has and Belongs To Many
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use the ``has_and_belongs_to_many`` macro to declare that a class model contains
a many-to-many relationship with another class. In a many-to-many relationship,
each document in one class can be associated with multiple documents in another
class. The following example creates a ``Band`` class with a
``has_and_belongs_to_many`` relationship to a ``Members`` class. A ``Band`` document can
reference multiple ``Members`` documents, and a ``Members`` document can
reference multiple ``Band`` documents.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/data-modeling/associations.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-has-and-belongs-to-many
   :end-before: # end-has-and-belongs-to-many

When you declare a ``has_and_belongs_to_many`` association, both model instances

> store a list of the associated document's ID values. You can set the
> ``inverse_of`` option to ``nil`` to store the associated document's ID values in
> only one of the model instances. The following example prompts {+odm+} to store
> the associated document's ID values in only the ``Band`` class:

Reviewer: S: since you use `_id` in other mentions
```suggestion
store a list of the associated document's ``_id`` values. You can set the
``inverse_of`` option to ``nil`` to store the associated document's ``_id`` values in
only one of the model instances. The following example prompts {+odm+} to store
the associated document's ``_id`` values in only the ``Band`` class:
```

Reviewer: Applies to all
